
=========================================
Chapter 4: Carbon and its Compounds
=========================================

Science 58Carbon and its
Compounds4 CHAPTER
In the last Chapter , we came to know many compounds of importance
to us. In this Chapter we will study about some more interesting
compounds and their properties. Also, we shall be learning about carbon,
an element which is of immense significance to us in both its elemental
form and in the combined form.
Things made Things made Others
of metal of glass/clayActivity 4.1Activity 4.1Activity 4.1Activity 4.1Activity 4.1
/square6Make a list of ten things you have used
or consumed since the morning.
/square6Compile this list with the lists made by
your classmates and then sort the items
into the adjacent Table.
/square6If there are items which are made up of
more than one material, put them into
both the relevant columns of the table.
Look at the items that come in the last column of the above table
filled by you – your teacher will be able to tell you that most of them are
made up of compounds of carbon. Can you think of a method to test
this? What would be the product if a compound containing carbon is
burnt? Do you know of any test to confirm this?
Food, clothes, medicines, books, or many of the things that you listed
are all based on this versatile element carbon. In addition, all living
structures are carbon based. The amount of carbon present in the earth’s
crust and in the atmosphere is quite meagre. The earth’s crust has only
0.02% carbon in the form of minerals (like carbonates, hydrogen-
carbonates, coal and petroleum) and the atmosphere has 0.03% of carbon
dioxide. In spite of this small amount of carbon available in nature, the
importance of carbon seems to be immense. In this Chapter , we will know
about the properties of carbon which make carbon so important to us.
4.1 BONDING IN CARBON – THE CO VALENT BOND
In the pr evious Chapter , we have studied the pr operties of ionic
compounds. W e saw that ionic compounds have high melting and boiling
points and conduct electricity in solution or in the molten state. W e also
2024-25

Carbon and its Compounds 59saw how the nature of bonding in ionic compounds explains these
properties. Let us now study the properties of some carbon compounds.
Most carbon compounds are poor conductors of electricity as we
have seen in Chapter 2. From the data
given in Table 4.1 on the boiling and
melting points of the carbon compounds,
we find that these compounds have low
melting and boiling points as compared
to ionic compounds (Chapter 3). W e can
conclude that the forces of attraction
between the molecules are not very
strong. Since these compounds are
largely non-conductors of electricity, we
can conclude that the bonding in these
compounds does not give rise to any ions.
In Class IX, we learnt about the
combining capacity of various elements and how it depends on the
number of valence electrons. Let us now look at the electronic
configuration of carbon. The atomic number of carbon is 6. What would
be the distribution of electrons in various shells of carbon? How many
valence electrons will carbon have?
We know that the r eactivity of elements is explained as their tendency
to attain a completely filled outer shell, that is, attain noble gas
configuration. Elements forming ionic compounds achieve this by either
gaining or losing electrons from the outermost shell. In the case of carbon,
it has four electrons in its outermost shell and needs to gain or lose four
electrons to attain noble gas configuration. If it were to gain or lose
electrons –
(i)It could gain four electrons forming C4– anion. But it would be difficult
for the nucleus with six protons to hold on to ten electrons, that is,
four extra electrons.
(ii)It could lose four electrons forming C4+ cation. But it would require
a large amount of energy to remove four electrons leaving behind a
carbon cation with six protons in its nucleus holding on to just two
electrons.
Carbon overcomes this problem by sharing its valence electrons with
other atoms of carbon or with atoms of other elements. Not just carbon,
but many other elements form molecules by sharing electrons in this
manner . The shar ed electr ons ‘belong’ to the outer most shells of both
the atoms and lead to both atoms attaining the noble gas configuration.
Before going on to compounds of carbon, let us look at some simple
molecules formed by the sharing of valence electrons.
The simplest molecule formed in this manner is that of hydrogen.
As you have lear nt earlier , the atomic number of hydrogen is 1. Hence
hydrogen has one electron in its K shell and it requires one more electron
to fill the K shell. So two hydrogen atoms share their electrons to form a
molecule of hydrogen, H2. This allows each hydrogen atom to attain theTable 4.1 Melting points and boiling points of some
compounds of carbon
Compound Melting Boiling
point (K) point (K)
Acetic acid (CH3COOH) 290 391
Chloroform (CHCl3) 209 334
Ethanol (CH3CH2OH) 156 351
Methane (CH4) 90 111
2024-25

Science 60Figure 4.4Figure 4.4Figure 4.4Figure 4.4Figure 4.4
Triple bond between
two nitrogen atoms
Figure 4.3Figure 4.3Figure 4.3Figure 4.3Figure 4.3
Double bond between
two oxygen atoms
electronic configuration of the nearest noble gas,
helium, which has two electr ons in its K shell. W e can
depict this using dots or crosses to represent valence
electrons (Fig. 4.1).
The shared pair of electrons is said to constitute a
single covalent bond between the two hydrogen atoms.
A single covalent bond is also represented by a line
between the two atoms, as shown in Fig. 4.2.
The atomic number of chlorine is 17. What would be its electronic
configuration and its valency? Chlorine forms a diatomic molecule, Cl2.
Can you draw the electron dot structure for this molecule? Note that
only the valence shell electrons need to be depicted.
In the case of oxygen, we see the formation of a double bond between
two oxygen atoms. This is because an atom of oxygen has six electrons
in its L shell (the atomic number of oxygen is eight) and it requires two
more electrons to complete its octet. So each atom of oxygen shares two
electrons with another atom of oxygen to give us the structure shown in
Fig. 4.3. The two electrons contributed by each oxygen atom give rise to
two shared pairs of electrons. This is said to constitute a double bond
between the two atoms.
Can you now depict a molecule of water showing the nature
of bonding between one oxygen atom and two hydrogen
atoms? Does the molecule have single bonds or double bonds?
What would happen in the case of a diatomic molecule of
nitrogen? Nitrogen has the atomic number 7. What would be
its electronic configuration and its combining capacity? In
order to attain an octet, each nitrogen atom in a molecule of
nitrogen contributes three electrons giving rise to three shared
pairs of electrons. This is said to constitute a triple bond
between the two atoms. The electron dot structure of N2 and
its triple bond can be depicted as in Fig. 4.4.
A molecule of ammonia has the formula NH3. Can you draw
the electron dot structure for this molecule showing how all
four atoms achieve noble gas configuration? Will the molecule
have single, double or triple bonds?
Let us now take a look at methane, which is a compound
of carbon. Methane is widely used as a fuel and is a major
component of bio-gas and Compressed Natural Gas (CNG). It
is also one of the simplest compounds formed by carbon.
Methane has a formula CH4. Hydrogen, as you know, has a
valency of 1. Carbon is tetravalent because it has four valence
electrons. In order to achieve noble gas configuration, carbon
shares these electrons with four atoms of hydrogen as shown
in Fig. 4.5.
Such bonds which are formed by the sharing of an electron pair
between two atoms are known as covalent bonds. Covalently bonded
molecules ar e seen to have str ong bonds within the molecule, but inter -
molecular forces are weak. This gives rise to the low melting and boiling
Figure 4.1Figure 4.1Figure 4.1Figure 4.1Figure 4.1
A molecule of hydrogen
Figure 4.2Figure 4.2Figure 4.2Figure 4.2Figure 4.2
Single bond between
two hydrogen atoms
2024-25

Carbon and its Compounds 61These two different structures result in diamond and graphite having very different
physical properties even though their chemical properties are the same. Diamond is
the hardest substance known while graphite is smooth and slippery. Graphite is also
a very good conductor of electricity unlike other non-metals that you studied in the
previous Chapter .
Diamonds can be synthesised by subjecting pure carbon to very high pressure and
temperature. These synthetic diamonds are small but are otherwise indistinguishable
from natural diamonds.
Fullerenes form another class of carbon allotropes. The first one to be identified was
C-60 which has carbon atoms arranged in the shape of a football. Since this looked
like the geodesic dome designed by the US ar chitect Buckminster Fuller , the molecule
was named fullerene.The structure of diamondThe structure of C-60
Buckminsterfullerene
QUESTIONS
?1. What would be the electron dot structure of carbon dioxide which has
the formula CO2?
2. What would be the electron dot structure of a molecule of sulphur which
is made up of eight atoms of sulphur? ( Hint –  The eight atoms of sulphur
are joined together in the form of a ring.)
Figure 4.5Figure 4.5Figure 4.5Figure 4.5Figure 4.5
Electron dot structure for
methanepoints of these compounds. Since the electrons are shared between
atoms and no charged particles are formed, such covalent compounds
are generally poor conductors of electricity.
Allotropes of carbon
The element carbon occurs in different forms in nature with
widely varying physical properties. Both diamond and
graphite are formed by carbon atoms, the difference lies in
the manner in which the carbon atoms are bonded to one
another . In diamond, each carbon atom is bonded to four
other carbon atoms forming a rigid three-dimensional
structure. In graphite, each carbon atom is bonded to three
other carbon atoms in the same plane giving a hexagonal array.
One of these bonds is a double-bond, and thus the valency of
carbon is satisfied. Graphite structure is formed by the
hexagonal arrays being placed in layers one above the other .More to Know!
The structure of graphite
2024-25

Science 624.2 VERS ATILE NA TURE OF CARBON
We have seen the for mation of covalent bonds by the sharing of
electr ons in various elements and compounds. W e have also seen the
structure of a simple carbon compound, methane. In the beginning
of the Chapter , we saw how many things we use contain carbon. In
fact, we ourselves are made up of carbon compounds. The numbers
of carbon compounds whose formulae are known to chemists was
recently estimated to be in million s! This outnumbers by a large
margin the compounds for med by all the other elements put together .
Why is it that this property is seen in carbon and no other element?
The nature of the covalent bond enables carbon to form a large number
of compounds. Two factors noticed in the case of carbon ar e –
(i)Carbon has the unique ability to form bonds with other atoms of
carbon, giving rise to large molecules. This property is called
catenation. These compounds may have long chains of carbon,
branched chains of carbon or even carbon atoms arranged in rings.
In addition, carbon atoms may be linked by single, double or triple
bonds. Compounds of carbon, which are linked by only single
bonds between the carbon atoms are called saturated compounds.
Compounds of carbon having double or triple bonds between their
carbon atoms are called unsaturated compounds.
No other element exhibits the property of catenation to the extent
seen in carbon compounds. Silicon forms compounds with
hydrogen which have chains of upto seven or eight atoms, but these
compounds are very reactive. The carbon-carbon bond is very strong
and hence stable. This gives us the large number of compounds
with many carbon atoms linked to each other .
(ii)Since carbon has a valency of four , it is capable of bonding with
four other atoms of carbon or atoms of some other mono-valent
element. Compounds of carbon are formed with oxygen, hydrogen,
nitrogen, sulphur , chlorine and many other elements giving rise to
compounds with specific properties which depend on the elements
other than carbon present in the molecule.
Again the bonds that carbon forms with most other elements are
very strong making these compounds exceptionally stable. One
reason for the formation of strong bonds by carbon is its small size.
This enables the nucleus to hold on to the shared pairs of electrons
strongly. The bonds formed by elements having bigger atoms are
much weaker .
2024-25


[Error extracting page 6]
Science 64The electron dot structure for ethene is given in Fig. 4.7.
Yet another compound of hydr ogen and carbon has the for mula
C2H2 and is called ethyne. Can you draw the electron dot
structure for ethyne? How many bonds are necessary between
the two carbon atoms in order to satisfy their valencies? Such
compounds of carbon having double or triple bonds between
the carbon atoms are known as unsaturated carbon compounds
and they are more reactive than the saturated carbon
compounds.
4.2.2 Chains, Branches and Rings
In the earlier section, we mentioned the carbon compounds methane,
ethane and propane, containing respectively 1, 2 and 3 carbon atoms.
Such ‘chains’ of carbon atoms can contain many more carbon atoms.
The names and structures of six of these are given in Table 4.2.
Figure 4.7Figure 4.7Figure 4.7Figure 4.7Figure 4.7
Structure of ethene
Table 4.2  Formulae and structures of saturated compounds of carbon and hydrogen
No. of C Name Formula Structure
atoms
1 Methane CH4
2 Ethane C2H6
3 Propane C3H8
4 Butane C4H10
5 Pentane C5H12
6 Hexane C6H14
2024-25

Carbon and its Compounds 65But, let us take another look at butane. If we make the carbon
‘skeleton’ with four carbon atoms, we see that two different possible
‘skeletons’ are –
C—C—C—C
Figure 4.8 Figure 4.8 Figure 4.8 Figure 4.8 Figure 4.8 (a) Two possible carbon-skeletons
Filling the remaining valencies with hydrogen gives us –
Figure 4.8 Figure 4.8 Figure 4.8 Figure 4.8 Figure 4.8 (b) Complete molecules for two structures with formula  C4H10
We see that both these structur es have the same for mula C4H10. Such
compounds with identical molecular formula but different structures
are called structural isomers.
In addition to straight and branched carbon chains, some compounds
have carbon atoms arranged in the form of a ring. For example, cyclohexane
has the formula C6H12 and the following structure –
(a) (b)
Figure 4.9 Figure 4.9 Figure 4.9 Figure 4.9 Figure 4.9 Structure of cyclohexane (a) carbon skeleton (b) complete molecule
Can you draw the electron dot structure for cyclohexane? Straight
chain, branched chain and cyclic carbon compounds, all may be saturated
or unsaturated. For example, benzene, C6H6, has the following structure  –
Benzene — C6H6
Figure 4.10 Figure 4.10 Figure 4.10 Figure 4.10 Figure 4.10 Structure of benzene
All these carbon compounds which contain only carbon and
hydrogen are called hydrocarbons. Among these, the saturated
hydrocarbons are called alkanes. The unsaturated hydrocarbons which
contain one or more double bonds are called alkenes. Those containing
one or more triple bonds are called alkynes.
4.2.3 Will you be my Friend?
Carbon seems to be a very friendly element. So far we have been looking at
compounds containing carbon and hydrogen only. But carbon also  forms
2024-25

Science 66bonds with other elements such as halogens, oxygen, nitr ogen and sulphur .
In a hydrocarbon chain, one or more hydrogens can be replaced by these
elements, such that the valency of carbon remains satisfied. In such
compounds, the element replacing hydrogen is referred to as a heteroatom.
These heteroatoms  are also present in some groups as given in Table 4.3.
These heteroatoms and
the group containing
these confer specific
properties to the
compound, regardless
of the length and nature
of the carbon chain and
hence are called
functional  groups. Some
important functional
groups are given in the
Table 4.3. Free valency  or
valencies of the group
are shown by the single
line. The functional group
is attached to the carbon
chain through this
valency by replacing  one
hydrogen   atom or
atoms.
4.2.4 Homologous Series
You have seen that carbon atoms can be linked together to for m chains
of varying lengths. These chains can be branched also. In addition,
hydrogen atom or other atoms on these carbon chains can be replaced
by any of the functional groups that we saw above. The presence of a
functional group such as alcohol decides the properties of the carbon
compound, regardless of the length of the carbon chain. For example,
the chemical properties of CH3OH, C2H5OH, C3H7OH and C4H9OH are all
very similar . Hence, such a series of compounds in which the same
functional group substitutes for hydrogen in a carbon chain is called a
homologous series.
Let us look at the homologous series that we saw earlier in Table
4.2. If we look at the formulae of successive compounds, say –
CH4 and C2H6—these differ by a –CH2- unit
C2H6 and C3H8—these differ by a –CH2- unit
What is the difference between the next pair – propane and butane (C4H10)?
Can you find out the difference in molecular masses between these
pairs (the atomic mass of carbon is 12 u and the atomic mass of hydrogen
is 1 u)?
Similarly, take the homologous series for alkenes. The first member
of the series is ethene which we have already come across in
Section 4.2.1. What is the formula for ethene? The succeeding members
have the formula C3H6, C4H8 and C5H10. Do these also differ by a –CH2–Table 4.3 Some functional groups in carbon compounds
Hetero HeteroHetero HeteroHetero Class of Class ofClass of Class ofClass of Formula ofFormula ofFormula ofFormula ofFormula of
atom atomatom atomatom compoundscompoundscompoundscompoundscompounds functional groupfunctional groupfunctional groupfunctional groupfunctional group
Cl/Br Halo- (Chloro/bromo) —Cl, —Br
alkane (substitutes for
hydrogen atom)
Oxygen 1. Alcohol —OH
2. Aldehyde
3. Ketone
4. Carboxylic acid
2024-25

Carbon and its Compounds 67unit? Do you see any relation between the number of carbon and
hydrogen atoms in these compounds? The general formula for alkenes
can be written as CnH2n, where n = 2, 3, 4. Can you similarly generate the
general formula for alkanes and alkynes?
As the molecular mass increases in any homologous series, a
gradation in physical properties is seen. This is because the melting and
boiling points increase with increasing molecular mass. Other physical
properties such as solubility in a particular solvent also show a similar
gradation. But the chemical properties, which are determined solely by
the functional group, remain similar in a homologous series.
Activity 4.2Activity 4.2Activity 4.2Activity 4.2Activity 4.2
4.2.5 Nomenclature of Carbon Compounds
The names of compounds in a homologous series are based on the name
of the basic carbon chain modified by a “prefix” “phrase before” or “suffix”
“phrase after” indicating the nature of the functional group. For example,
the names of the alcohols taken in Activity 4.2 are methanol, ethanol,
propanol and butanol.
Naming a carbon compound can be done by the following method –
(i)Identify the number of carbon atoms in the compound. A compound
having three carbon atoms would have the name propane.
(ii)In case a functional group is present, it is indicated in the
name of the compound with either a prefix or a suffix (as given
in Table 4.4).
(iii) If the name of the functional group is to be given as a suffix, and the
suffix of the functional group begins with a vowel a, e, i, o, u, then
the name of the carbon chain is modified by deleting the final ‘e’ and
adding the appropriate suffix. For example, a three-carbon chain
with a ketone group would be named in the following manner –
Propane – ‘e’ = propan + ‘one’ = propanone.
(iv) If the carbon chain is unsaturated, then the final ‘ane’ in the name
of the carbon chain is substituted by ‘ene’ or ‘yne’ as given in
Table 4.4. For example, a three-carbon chain with a double bond
would be called propene and if it has a triple bond, it would be
called propyne./square6Calculate the difference in the formulae and molecular masses
for (a) CH3OH and C2H5OH (b) C2H5OH and C3H7OH, and (c) C3H7OH
and C4H9OH.
/square6Is there any similarity in these three?
/square6Arrange these alcohols in the order of increasing carbon atoms to
get a family. Can we call this family a homologous series?
/square6Generate the homologous series for compounds containing up to
four carbons for the other functional groups given in Table 4.3.
2024-25

Science 68bromo, etc.
QUESTIONS
1. How many structural isomers can you draw for pentane?
2. What are the two properties of carbon which lead to the huge number
of carbon compounds we see around us?
3. What will be the formula and electron dot structure of cyclopentane? Table 4.4 Nomenclature of organic compounds
Class of Prefix/Suffix Example
compounds
1. Halo alkane Prefix-chloro, Chloropropane
Bromopropane
2. Alcohol Suffix - ol Propanol
3. Aldehyde Suffix - al Propanal
4. Ketone Suffix - one Propanone
5. Carboxylic acid Suffix - oic acid Propanoic acid
6. Alkenes Suffix - ene Propene
7. Alkynes Suffix - yne Propyne
2024-25

Carbon and its Compounds 69?4. Draw the structures for the following compounds.
(i)Ethanoic acid (ii) Bromopentane *
(iii)Butanone (iv) Hexanal.
*Are structural isomers possible for bromopentane?
5. How would you name the following compounds?
(i)CH3—CH2—Br (ii)   
(iii)
4.3 CHEMIC AL PROPERTIES OF CARBON COMPOUNDS
In this section we will be studying about some of the chemical properties
of carbon compounds. Since most of the fuels we use are either carbon
or its compounds, we shall first study combustion.
4.3.1 Combustion4.3.1 Combustion4.3.1 Combustion4.3.1 Combustion4.3.1 Combustion
Carbon, in all its allotropic forms, burns in oxygen to give carbon dioxide
along with the release of heat and light. Most carbon compounds also
release a large amount of heat and light on burning. These are the
oxidation reactions that you learnt about in the first Chapter –
(i)C + O2 → CO2 + heat and light
(ii)CH4 + O2 → CO2 + H2O + heat and light
(iii)CH3CH2OH + O2 → CO2 + H2O + heat and light
Balance the latter two r eactions like you lear nt in the first Chapter .
Activity 4.3Activity 4.3Activity 4.3Activity 4.3Activity 4.3
CAUTION: This Activity needs the teacher’s assistance.
/square6Take some carbon compounds (naphthalene,
camphor , alcohol) one by one on a spatula and bur n
them.
/square6Observe the nature of the flame and note whether
smoke is produced.
/square6Place a metal plate above the flame. Is there a deposition
on the plate in case of any of the compounds?Activity 4.4Activity 4.4Activity 4.4Activity 4.4Activity 4.4
/square6Light a bunsen burner and
adjust the air hole at the
base to get different types of
flames/presence of smoke.
/square6When do you get a yellow,
sooty flame?
/square6When do you get a blue
flame?
Saturated hydrocarbons will generally give a clean flame while
unsaturated carbon compounds will give a yellow flame with lots of
black smoke. This results in a sooty deposit on the metal plate in Activity
4.3. However , limiting the supply of air r esults in incomplete combustion
of even saturated hydrocarbons giving a sooty flame. The gas/kerosene
stove used at home has inlets for air so that a sufficiently oxygen-rich
2024-25

Science 70mixture is burnt to give a clean blue flame. If you observe the bottoms of
cooking vessels getting blackened, it means that the air holes are blocked
and fuel is getting wasted. Fuels such as coal and petroleum have some
amount of nitrogen and sulphur in them. Their combustion results in
the formation of oxides of sulphur and nitrogen which are major
pollutants in the environment.Do Y ou Know?Why do substances burn with or without a flame?
Have you ever observed either a coal or a wood fire? If not, the next time you get a
chance, take close note of what happens when the wood or coal starts to bur n. You
have seen above that a candle or the LPG in the gas stove bur ns with a flame. However ,
you will observe the coal or charcoal in an ‘angithi’ sometimes just glows red and
gives out heat without a flame. This is because a flame is only produced when gaseous
substances burn. When wood or charcoal is ignited, the volatile substances present
vapourise and burn with a flame in the beginning.
A luminous flame is seen when the atoms of the gaseous substance are heated and
start to glow. The colour produced by each element is a characteristic property of
that element. T ry and heat a copper wir e in the flame of a gas stove and observe its
colour . You have seen that incomplete combustion gives soot which is carbon. On
this basis, what will you attribute the yellow colour of a candle flame to?
Formation of coal and petroleum
Coal and petroleum have been formed from biomass which has been subjected to
various biological and geological processes. Coal is the remains of trees, ferns, and
other plants that lived millions of years ago. These were crushed into the earth,
perhaps by earthquakes or volcanic eruptions. They were pressed down by layers of
earth and rock. They slowly decayed into coal. Oil and gas are the remains of millions
of tiny plants and animals that lived in the sea. When they died, their bodies sank to
the sea bed and were covered by silt. Bacteria attacked the dead remains, turning
them into oil and gas under the high pressures they were being subjected to.
Meanwhile, the silt was slowly compressed into rock. The oil and gas seeped into the
porous parts of the rock, and got trapped like water in a sponge. Can you guess why
coal and petroleum are called fossil fuels?
4.3.2 Oxidation
Activity 4.5Activity 4.5Activity 4.5Activity 4.5Activity 4.5
/square6Take about 3 mL of ethanol in a test tube and warm it
gently in a water bath.
/square6Add a 5% solution of alkaline potassium permanganate
drop by drop to this solution.
/square6Does the colour of potassium permanganate persist when
it is added initially?
/square6Why does the colour of potassium permanganate not
disappear when excess is added?You have lear nt
about oxidation reactions in
the first Chapter . Carbon
compounds can be easily
oxidised on combustion. In
addition to this complete
oxidation, we have reactions
in which alcohols are
converted to carboxylic
acids –More to Know!
2024-25

Carbon and its Compounds 71
We see that some substances ar e capable of adding oxygen to others.
These substances are known as oxidising agents.
Alkaline potassium permanganate or acidified potassium dichromate
are oxidising alcohols to acids, that is, adding oxygen to the starting
material. Hence they are known as oxidising agents.
4.3.3 Addition Reaction
Unsaturated hydrocarbons add hydrogen in the presence of catalysts
such as palladium or nickel to give saturated hydrocarbons. Catalysts
are substances that cause a reaction to occur or proceed at a different
rate without the reaction itself being affected. This reaction is commonly
used in the hydrogenation of vegetable oils using a nickel catalyst.
Vegetable oils generally have long unsaturated carbon chains while
animal fats have saturated carbon chains.
You must have seen advertisements stating that some vegetable oils
are ‘healthy’. Animal fats generally contain saturated fatty acids which
are said to be harmful for health. Oils containing unsaturated fatty acids
should be chosen for cooking.
4.3.4 Substitution Reaction
Saturated hydrocarbons are fairly unreactive and are inert in the presence
of most r eagents. However , in the pr esence of sunlight, chlorine is added
to hydrocarbons in a very fast reaction. Chlorine can replace the hydrogen
atoms one by one. It is called a substitution reaction because one type
of atom or a group of atoms takes the place of another . A number of
products are usually formed with the higher homologues of alkanes.
CH4 + Cl2 → CH3Cl + HCl (in the presence of sunlight)
?QUESTIONS
1. Why is the conversion of ethanol to ethanoic acid an oxidation reaction?
2. A mixture of oxygen and ethyne is burnt for welding. Can you tell why
a mixture of ethyne and air is not used?
4.4 SOME IMPORT ANT C ARBON COMPOUNDS – ETHANOL
AND ETHANOIC ACID
Many carbon compounds are invaluable to us. But here we shall study
the properties of two commercially important compounds – ethanol and
ethanoic acid.
2024-25

Science 724.4.1 Proper ties of Ethanol
Ethanol is a liquid at room temperature (refer to Table 4.1 for the melting
and boiling points of ethanol). Ethanol is commonly called alcohol and
is the active ingredient of all alcoholic drinks. In addition, because it is a
good solvent, it is also used in medicines such as tincture iodine, cough
syrups, and many tonics. Ethanol is also soluble in water in all
proportions. Consumption of small quantities of dilute ethanol causes
drunkenness. Even though this practice is condemned, it is a socially
widespr ead practice. However , intake of even a small quantity of pure
ethanol (called absolute alcohol) can be lethal. Also, long-term
consumption of alcohol leads to many health problems.
Reactions of EthanolReactions of EthanolReactions of EthanolReactions of EthanolReactions of Ethanol
(i) Reaction with sodium –
Activity 4.6Activity 4.6Activity 4.6Activity 4.6Activity 4.6
Teacher’s demonstration  –
/square6Drop a small piece of sodium,
about the size of a couple of
grains of rice, into ethanol
(absolute alcohol).
/square6What do you observe?
/square6How will you test the gas evolved?2Na + 2CH3CH2OH → 2CH3CH2O–Na+ + H2
 (Sodium ethoxide)
Alcohols react with sodium leading to the
evolution of hydrogen. With ethanol, the other
product is sodium ethoxide. Can you recall which
other substances produce hydrogen on reacting with
metals?
(ii)Reaction to give unsaturated hydrocarbon: Heating ethanol at
443 K with excess concentrated sulphuric acid results in the
dehydration of ethanol to give ethene –
CH CH OH CH  = CH  + H O3 2 2 2 2Ho
t Conc.
H SO2 4−  → 
The concentrated sulphuric acid can be regarded as a dehydrating
agent which removes water from ethanol.
How do alcohols affect living beings?
When large quantities of ethanol are consumed, it tends to slow metabolic processes
and to depress the central nervous system. This results in lack of coordination,
mental confusion, dr owsiness, lowering of the nor mal inhibitions, and finally stupor .
The individual may feel relaxed without realising that his sense of judgement, sense
of timing, and muscular coordination have been seriously impaired.
Unlike ethanol, intake of methanol in very small quantities can cause death. Methanol
is oxidised to methanal in the liver . Methanal r eacts rapidly with the components of
cells. It coagulates the protoplasm, in much the same way an egg is coagulated by
cooking. Methanol also affects the optic nerve, causing blindness.
Ethanol is an important industrial solvent. To prevent the misuse of ethanol produced
for industrial use, it is made unfit for drinking by adding poisonous substances
like methanol to it. Dyes are also added to colour the alcohol blue so that it can be
identified easily. This is called denatured alcohol.Do Y ou Know?
2024-25

Carbon and its Compounds 734.4.2 Proper ties of Ethanoic Acid
Ethanoic acid is commonly called acetic acid and
belongs to a group of acids called carboxylic
acids. 5-8% solution of acetic acid in water is
called vinegar and is used widely as a preservative
in pickles. The melting point of pure ethanoic acid
is 290 K and hence it often freezes during winter
in cold climates. This gave rise to its name glacial
acetic acid.
The group of organic compounds called
carboxylic acids are obviously characterised by
their acidic nature. However, unlike mineral acids
like HCl, which are completely ionised, carboxylic
acids are weak acids.Activity 4.7Activity 4.7Activity 4.7Activity 4.7Activity 4.7
nCompare the pH of dilute acetic acid
and dilute hydrochloric acid using
both litmus paper and universal
indicator.
nAre both acids indicated by the
litmus test?
nDoes the universal indicator show
them as equally strong acids?
Activity 4.8Activity 4.8Activity 4.8Activity 4.8Activity 4.8
nTake 1 mL ethanol (absolute alcohol)
and 1 mL glacial acetic acid along
with a few drops of concentrated
sulphuric acid in a test tube.
nWarm in a water-bath for at least five
minutes as shown in Fig. 4.11.
nPour into a beaker containing
20-50 mL of water and smell the
resulting mixture.
Reactions of ethanoic acid:Reactions of ethanoic acid:Reactions of ethanoic acid:Reactions of ethanoic acid:Reactions of ethanoic acid:
(i)Esterification reaction:  Esters are most commonly
formed by reaction of an acid and an alcohol.
Ethanoic acid reacts with absolute ethanol in the
presence of an acid catalyst to give an ester –
CH COOH CH CH OH CH C C CH CH H O3 3 2 3 2 3 2Acid
O
(E− + − − − − − +
11
t thanoic acid)            (Ethanol)                               (Ester)O
Generally, e sters are sweet-smelling substances. These are used in
making perfumes and as flavouring agents. On treating with sodium
hydroxide, which is an alkali, the ester is converted back to  alcohol
and sodium salt of carboxylic acid. This reaction is known as
saponification because it is used in the preparation of  soap. Soaps
are sodium or potassium salts of long chain carboxylic acid.Figure 4.11Figure 4.11Figure 4.11Figure 4.11Figure 4.11
Formation of esterAlcohol as a fuelAlcohol as a fuelAlcohol as a fuelAlcohol as a fuelAlcohol as a fuel
Sugarcane plants are one of the most efficient convertors of sunlight into chemical
energy. Sugarcane juice can be used to prepare molasses which is fermented to give
alcohol (ethanol). Some countries now use alcohol as an additive in petrol since it is a
cleaner fuel which gives rise to only carbon dioxide and water on burning in sufficient
air (oxygen).More to Know!
2024-25

Science 74CH COOC H C H OH+CH COONa3 2 5 2 5 3NaOH
(ii)Reaction with a base:  Like mineral acids, ethanoic acid reacts with
a base such as sodium hydroxide to give a salt (sodium ethanoate
or commonly called sodium acetate) and water:
NaOH + CH3COOH → CH3COONa + H2O
How does ethanoic acid react with carbonates and
hydrogencarbonates?
Let us perform an activity to find out.
Activity 4.9Activity 4.9Activity 4.9Activity 4.9Activity 4.9
/square6Set up the apparatus as shown in Chapter 2, Activity 2.5.
/square6Take a spatula full of sodium carbonate in a test tube and add 2 mL of dilute
ethanoic acid.
/square6What do you observe?
/square6Pass the gas pr oduced thr ough fr eshly pr epared lime-water . What do you observe?
/square6Can the gas produced by the reaction between ethanoic acid and sodium carbonate be
identified by this test?
/square6Repeat this Activity with sodium hydrogencarbonate instead of sodium carbonate.
(iii)Reaction with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates : Ethanoic acid
reacts with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates to give rise to a
salt, carbon dioxide and water . The salt pr oduced is commonly called
sodium acetate.
2CH3COOH + Na2CO3 → 2CH3COONa + H2O + CO2
CH3COOH + NaHCO3 → CH3COONa + H2O + CO2
QUESTIONS
1. How would you distinguish experimentally between an alcohol and
a carboxylic acid?
2. What are oxidising agents?
4.5 SOAPS AND DETERGENTS
Activity 4.10Activity 4.10Activity 4.10Activity 4.10Activity 4.10
/square6Take about 10 mL of water each in two test tubes.
/square6Add a drop of oil (cooking oil) to both  the test tubes
and label them as A and B.
/square6To test tube B, add a few drops of soap solution.
/square6Now shake both the test tubes vigourously for
the same period of time.
/square6Can you see the oil and water layers separately
in both the test tubes immediately after you
stop shaking them?
/square6Leave the test tubes undisturbed for some time
and observe. Does the oil layer separate out?
In which test tube does this happen first?Figure 4.12Figure 4.12Figure 4.12Figure 4.12Figure 4.12
Formation of micelles?
2024-25

Carbon and its Compounds 75This activity demonstrates the effect of soap in cleaning. Most dirt is
oily in nature and as you know, oil does not dissolve in water . The
molecules of soap are sodium or potassium salts of long-chain carboxylic
acids. The ionic-end of soap interacts with water while the carbon chain
interacts with oil. The soap molecules, thus form structures called
micelles (see Fig. 4.12) where one end of the molecules is towards the oil
droplet while the ionic-end faces outside. This forms an emulsion in
water . The soap micelle thus helps  in pulling out the dirt in water and
we can wash our clothes clean (Fig. 4.13).
Can you draw the structure of the micelle that would be formed if
you dissolve soap in a hydrocarbon?
Micelles
Soaps are molecules in which the two ends have differing properties, one is hydrophilic,
that is, it interacts with water , while the other end is hydr ophobic, that is, it interacts
with hydr ocarbons. When soap is at the sur face of water , the hydr ophobic ‘tail’ of soap
will not be soluble in water and the soap will align along the surface of water with the
ionic end in water and the hydr ocarbon ‘tail’ pr otruding out of water . Inside  water ,
these molecules have a unique orientation that keeps
the hydr ocarbon portion out of the water . Thus,
clusters of molecules in which the hydrophobic tails
are in the interior of the cluster and the ionic ends
are on the sur face of the cluster . This for mation is
called a micelle. Soap in the form of a micelle is able
to clean, since the oily dirt will be collected in the
centre of the micelle. The micelles stay in solution as
a colloid and will not come together to precipitate
because of ion-ion repulsion. Thus, the dirt
suspended in the micelles is also easily rinsed away.
The soap micelles are large enough to scatter light.
Hence a soap solution appears cloudy.
Figure 4.13Figure 4.13Figure 4.13Figure 4.13Figure 4.13  Effect of soap in cleaningMore to Know!
2024-25

Science 76Activity 4.11Activity 4.11Activity 4.11Activity 4.11Activity 4.11
/square6Take about 10 mL of distilled water (or rain water) and 10 mL of
hard water (from a tubewell or hand-pump) in separate test tubes.
/square6Add a couple of drops of soap solution to both.
/square6Shake the test tubes vigorously for an equal period of time and
observe the amount of foam formed.
/square6In which test tube do you get more foam?
/square6In which test tube do you observe a white curdy precipitate?
Note for the teache r: If hard water is not available in your locality,
prepare some hard water by dissolving hydrogencarbonates/
sulphates/chlorides of calcium or magnesium in water .
Activity 4.12Activity 4.12Activity 4.12Activity 4.12Activity 4.12
/square6Take two test tubes with about 10 mL of hard water in each.
/square6Add five drops of soap solution to one and five drops of detergent
solution to the other .
/square6Shake both test tubes for the same period.
/square6Do both test tubes have the same amount of foam?
/square6In which test tube is a curdy solid formed?
?QUESTIONS
1. Would you be able to check if water is har d by using a deter gent?
2. People use a variety of methods to wash clothes. Usually after adding
the soap, they ‘beat’ the clothes on a stone, or beat it with a paddle,
scrub with a brush or the mixture is agitated in a washing machine.
Why is agitation necessary to get clean clothes?Have you ever observed while bathing that foam is formed with
difficulty and an insoluble substance (scum) remains after washing with
water? This is caused by the reaction of soap with the calcium and
magnesium salts, which cause the hardness of water . Hence you need
to use a larger amount of soap. This problem is overcome by using
another class of compounds called detergents as cleansing agents.
Detergents are generally sodium salts of sulphonic acids or ammonium
salts with chlorides or bromides ions, etc. Both have long hydrocarbon
chain. The charged ends of these compounds do not form insoluble
precipitates with the calcium and magnesium ions in har d water . Thus,
they r emain ef fective in har d water . Deter gents ar e usually used to make
shampoos and products for cleaning clothes.
2024-25

Carbon and its Compounds 77What y ou hav e learnt
/square6Carbon is a versatile element that forms the basis for all living organisms and many
of the things we use.
/square6This large variety of compounds is formed by carbon because of its tetravalency
and the property of catenation that it exhibits.
/square6Covalent bonds are formed by the sharing of electrons between two atoms so that
both can achieve a completely filled outermost shell.
/square6Carbon forms covalent bonds with itself and other elements such as hydrogen,
oxygen, sulphur , nitrogen and chlorine.
/square6Carbon also forms compounds containing double and triple bonds between carbon
atoms. These carbon chains may be in the form of straight chains, branched chains
or rings.
/square6The ability of carbon to form chains gives rise to a homologous series of compounds
in which the same functional group is attached to carbon chains of different lengths.
/square6The functional groups such as alcohols, aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids
bestow characteristic properties to the carbon compounds that contain them.
/square6Carbon and its compounds are some of our major sources of fuels.
/square6Ethanol and ethanoic acid are carbon compounds of importance in our daily lives.
/square6The action of soaps and detergents is based on the presence of both hydrophobic
and hydrophilic groups in the molecule and this helps to emulsify the oily dirt and
hence its removal.
EXERCISES
1.Ethane, with the molecular formula C2H6 has
(a) 6 covalent bonds.
(b) 7 covalent bonds.
(c) 8 covalent bonds.
(d) 9 covalent bonds.
2.Butanone is a four -carbon compound with the functional group
(a) carboxylic acid.
(b) aldehyde.
(c)ketone.
(d) alcohol.
3.While cooking, if the bottom of the vessel is getting blackened on the outside,
it means that
(a)the food is not cooked completely.
(b) the fuel is not burning completely.
(c)the fuel is wet.
(d) the fuel is burning completely.
2024-25

Science 784.Explain the nature of the covalent bond using the bond formation in CH3Cl.
5.Draw the electron dot structures for
(a)ethanoic acid.
(b) H2S.
(c) propanone.
(d) F2 .
6.What is an homologous series? Explain with an example.
7.How can ethanol and ethanoic acid be differentiated on the basis of their physical
and chemical properties?
8.Why does micelle formation take place when soap is added to water? Will a micelle
be formed in other solvents such as ethanol also?
9.Why are carbon and its compounds used as fuels for most applications?
10.Explain the formation of scum when hard water is treated with soap.
11.What change will you observe if you test soap with litmus paper (red and blue)?
12.What is hydrogenation? What is its industrial application?
13.Which of the following hydrocarbons undergo addition reactions:
C2H6, C3H8, C3H6, C2H2 and CH4.
14.Give a test that can be used to differentiate between saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons.
15.Explain the mechanism of the cleaning action of soaps.
 IUse molecular model kits to make models of the compounds you have learnt in
this Chapter .
II/square6Take about 20 mL of castor oil/cotton seed oil/linseed oil/soyabean oil in a
beaker . Add 30 mL of 20 % sodium hydr oxide solution. Heat the mixtur e with
continuous stirring for a few minutes till the mixture thickens. Add 5-10 g of
common salt to this. Stir the mixture well and allow it to cool.
/square6You can cut out the soap in fancy shapes. Y ou can also add per fume to the
soap before it sets.Group  A ctivity
2024-25

